OK, so we've just gone through the painful process of carrying out this convoluted experiment.
What did we discover?
What we have found is that by accounting for the fact or the second postulate a special relativity,
that light is always going to be a constant regardless of your reference frame.
We found that the time elapsed by two events in different inertial reference frames are not the same.
That time is going to flow in a different manner compared to observer and observer B if they are in
different inertial reference frames.
OK, so we have identified that it's different, but we don't know how the effect transpires, how it
comes into play, right?
Does it differ by a lot?
Does it differ by a little bit?
Which one is running faster?
Which one is running slower?
So let's explore what we have just discovered and try and figure out if we can pinpoint the type of
behavior that we're going to observe between these reference frames.
So again, we found that Delta T or the time as observed by somebody in the S reference frame on Earth
is equal to this Lorentz factor gamma times, delta t prime or the time measured by the person in the
moving reference frame, Terence.
Now what we want to do is we want to plot up this Lorenz factor here and see what kind of values we
get, see how it behaves for different values of relative velocities or this guy right here in the Bay
Area and see what we could find.
Okay, so if we do that, you know, you could plop it in MATLAB, plop it in Mathematica, use Wolfram
Alpha, use whatever you want to use.
We get the following OK, so we have this curve here.
We see that gamma is pretty small and it's pretty small for a lot of ranges of beta.
Once we hit 0.5 tabular values here, it's only one point one five times the moving reference frames
time.
That's not a big increase in time, but what we found here is that regardless of what value we have,
gamma is always greater than one, and it tends to go to infinity when beta gets large.
So, you know, initially at these small ranges, the low point eight six six six.
You know, we're close to one.
There's not much of a change and then above that, oh, it blows up or we start getting these awesome
effects coming into play here.
And that's where it's it's bound by infinity.
And what I'm going to say is that relativistic effects are most constraints in this region, that this
range are pointing to.
This, which corresponds to a value of two as tabulated here starts to blow up.
We get really close to the speed of light point nine nine nine nine five or I'm going to say that again
point nine nine nine nine five.
The time difference is we have a factor here.
So in a table we're finding is that time or the Lawrence factor is bounded between one an affinity.
And it's always a positive value, so the time that it's observed on Earth is always larger than the
time as observed in the moving reference frame.
That's what this equation is telling us, right?
So the implied effect we just discovered.
We're going to call it time dilation, as I say, and finish a lot of the time.
The names we give to confess the names we give to ideas dictate the behavior of the phenomenon that's
taking place dilation.
Think of dilation of your eyeballs.
It means getting bigger, getting larger.
So the time is getting bigger as observed by somebody on Earth, as observed by the stationary or observing
entity.
And it also means that a moving clock the clock in the moving round has been in the space ship is observed
to move slow the observed very slow.
What do I mean by that?
Let's let's observe that.
So when this happens, let's say that Terence is going actually at point eight, six, six times the
speed of light.
So we get a bit of pointing fix this, and that's why it is so useful because we don't have to Ulysses.
We just get this relative factor.
Let's say it's going at that speed of light.
And Terence says, Hey, this took 10 minutes, this to happen.
Of course, that wouldn't happen.
But just for this circumstance to express what is going on in this relationship, he says it takes 10
minutes for the light to go up and come down.
You know, my light was lazy in this this situation.
Philip, what do you get he does this calculation, he's like, Oh my God, that's why his face is so
big.
He says, Well, this relation we just discovered it's this beta is poisonous.
Snakes are gamma.
It's going to be too.
If it took 10 minutes for you.
You know what, it took 20 minutes for me.
Wow, that's crazy.
That's crazy.
This is this seems so unconventional, it seems so just take a slap in the face of our general wisdom,
our general intuition, because this never happens quite often.
Like, who disagrees about time?
Hardly anybody.
But the reason why this doesn't crop up in every like every day events is because this guy is like flat.
Look at it.
It's flat.
It has to do with the equation here.
The gamma level risk factor is about one until two we go point five times the speed of light point five
times three times 10 to the eight meters per second.
That's 1.5 times 10 to the eight meters per second.
That's when we only get a relativistic factor of one point one, five five.
So in other words?
In everyday situations, this is not observable.
It does not arise.
It's hidden beneath layers.
And that's why I say here, when there's is much less than see beat is approximately zero and gamma
is about equal to one, right?
We don't get relativistic effects.
That's why the Galilean transformation.
When Bill up in Terence did their experiment.
That's why their observations, their time lined up.
It wasn't different.
Right?
Because this relativistic effect did not crop up.
It only arises when we travel close to the speed of light.
And that's why it feels so unintuitive.
That's why it spits in the face of everything we know about the universe in physics.
Right.
It's a very weird idea.
And if it's hard to accept that time dilation.
It's something that happens.
Just remember, this is a consequence of an observation we found that the speed of light is constant
because we're a reference frame which we have tested again and again and again.
OK, so there's one other cool effect that's hidden and what we've just discovered.
We take this guy here.
We know that if we divide by a number, we cannot divide by zero.
So what's hidden in here?
Well, we cannot divide by zero.
And we also cannot have negative numbers under the square root.
Right.
So that means that a beat is greater than one, we get a negative number.
We get imaginary numbers.
We got an imaginary time.
We don't deal with imaginary numbers in physical quantities, right?
Nature is nice.
It behaves pretty well for the most part.
So Peter here cannot be less than one.
So what I'm saying and what I just ran through my mind, I'll spell it out.
In terms of this, I say, oh, one minus beta squared.
This guy has to be greater than zero.
So we bring Beta Square there to the square root that doesn't change much.
You get.
PETA or.
I'll make a match up for you guys you get.
Beta.
Is less than one.
OK.
What does that tell us right here?
Basically, this guy is less than one.
This guy.
It's less than one, which means.
That.
They.
Is less than sea, right, and this is why you've probably heard maybe it's sci fi, maybe somewhere
else that the speed of light beam, not the speed of light, the speed of anything in the universe cannot
exceed the speed of light.
We see this a set of tonic particles.
We see this in CERN when they're doing their particle acceleration experiments.
Nothing can exceed the speed of light.
This is a cap on the limit of speed imposed by the universe, and it is 100 percent real.
This is not fictional.
This is a real effect that we observe.
OK.
A time violation, I want to make it clear time dilation is an observable fact.
OK, this is something that you're going to see, no matter what it's going to arise.
If you've seen the movie Interstellar and this is a different relativistic effect, but it's similar.
You may remember that the individuals in the spaceship, they went down to that planet with heavy gravity,
with a huge waves, and they came back up.
They were it's a different effect.
It's more in terms of general relativity, which we won't get into, but the time time had to bend to
account for these ideas.
Space time bends to correct and account for the second part of a special relativity.
That's what's giving rise to all this stuff.
That's what's given rise to this.